Consent was obtained for primary/repeat elective/intrapartum emergent lower segment Cesarean section prior to procedure. Risks, benefits, and alternatives were discussed. The patient was brought to the operating room and questions were answered. A surgical checklist was performed and 2 grams of cefazolin (Ancef) IV were administered preoperatively. Anesthetic was administered by Dr. _. Patient was placed in the supine position with left lateral tilt. A Foley catheter was inserted and the bladder was drained. Urine was clear. She was prepped and draped in a usual sterile fashion (or a splash prep was done). A Pfannenstiel incision was performed 3cm above the superior border of pubic symphysis (or the patient's previous Pfannenstiel incision was noted and an incision was made through her previous scar). The incision was carried down using electrosurgical dissection through the subcutaneous layer to the level of the rectus fascia. Rectus fascia was incised transversely at the midline and the incision was extended laterally with curved Mayo scissors. The superior and inferior edges of the rectus fascia were elevated using 2 Kochers and the subfascial adhesions were taken down using electrocautery/Mayo scissors. Rectus abdominis muscles were identified and separated using blunt dissection. Peritoneum was entered bluntly (or grasped using 2 Kelly hemostats and entered sharply using scalpel/Mayo scissors). Peritoneum was stretched bluntly using surgeon's hands (or extended using sharp/blunt dissection). Bladder flap was created and the bladder was dissected off the uterus to expose the lower uterine segment. A low transverse uterine incision was performed in the lower uterine segment to the level of membranes and membranes were made to bulge (the membranes were entered). The uterine incision was widened digitally. The membranes were ruptured using a hemostat and the amniotic fluid appeared to be clear/meconium stained/bloody. The infant's head/shoulder/breech was visible through the uterine incision. The surgeon's hand was inserted into the uterine cavity and the presenting part was palpated. The infant was in a longitudinal/transverse lie and OA/OT/OP position or breech presentation. Wrigley's forceps or vacuum was applied. The head was delivered first without difficulty with a combination of fungal pressure and gentle traction (or the infant was delivered breech using maneuvers or since the infant was impacted into the pelvis, the presenting part was elevated vaginally). # nuchal/body cords were present, which were pulled over the baby's head.
A singleton viable M/F infant was delivered on _(date) at _(time). The infant's birth weight was _kg and APGAR scores were _ and _ at 1 and 5 minutes respectively. Cord arterial pH was _. Delayed cord clamping of 60 seconds was performed. The umbilical cord was clamped and cut and the infant was given to the NICU staff. Cord blood gases were collected. The infant did not require extensive resuscitation or admission to NICU. Placenta was delivered spontaneously/manually at (time) with gentle cord traction and sent to pathology. The uterine cavity was wiped using laparotomy sponges to remove the remaining clots and debris. Carbetocin 100mcg IV was administered by the anesthetist. Exteriorization of the uterus was performed. The lower end of the Balfour retractor was reintroduced and the uterine incision edges were grasped using 4 green armitages/ring forceps. The uterine incision was closed using a single/double layer running-lock No.1 Vicryl suture. # figure-of-8 sutures were required to achieve hemostasis. The uterine incision was inspected thoroughly to ensure that hemostasis was achieved. The uterus had good tone. PPH occurred due to and was managed with. Bladder, uterus, ovaries, and fallopian tubes were inspected and appeared to be normal. Laparotomy sponges were removed. Paracolic gutters and cul-de-sac were suctioned of blood and amniotic fluid. 
Bilateral partial salpingectomy (tubal ligation): Right fallopian tube was identified. A Babcock clamp was used to elevate the fallopian tube. The avascular space was identified at the midpoint of the fallopian tube. An opening to the mesosalpinx was created using electrocautery. 2 hemostats were inserted through the mesosalpingeal opening and placed on the fallopian tube 2cm apart. The proximal ends of the fallopian tube were cut using curved Mayo scissors. Ends of the fallopian tube were tied twice using 0-gauge chromic suture. The pedicles and mesosalpinx were inspected to ensure that hemostasis was achieved. Procedure was repeated for the left fallopian tube. Tubal segments were sent to pathology for histologic confirmation of complete transection. The abdominal incision was closed in layers. Thorough inspection and coagulation of bleeding sites was performed to ensure that hemostasis was achieved. Peritoneum was closed using 2-0 Vicryl suture. Rectus fascia was closed using No. 1 Vicryl suture in a continuous nonlocking fashion. Subcutaneous layers were irrigated with sterile warm water. Subcutaneous layer was closed using 2-0 Vicryl suture in a continuous nonlocking fashion. The skin layer was closed using 3-0 Monocryl/Vicryl suture in continuous subcuticular fashion. The wound was cleaned. Steri strips and dressing were applied. A pelvic examination was performed to evacuate any blood clots and to ensure cervical patency. The patient received 500mg naproxen, 650mg Tylenol, and 800mcg misoprostol suppository per rectum. Foley catheter was draining clear urine to gravity. Sponge, instrument, and needle counts were reported to be correct by the nursing staff (or if no counts were done, post-op Xray was normal). EBL was _mL. There were no complications. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was transferred to the recovery room (or ICU) in a stable condition. Both mother and baby are stable at the time of the dictation. Implications for future pregnancy: The patient had a low transverse uterine incision in the lower uterine segment with a single/double layer uterine closure. There are no contraindications at this time for trial of labour in the future. It is recommended for her to have an inter-delivery interval of greater than 18 months. OR the patient has had # (≥2) previous C/S and therefore will require elective repeat C/S in the future. OR the patient has had a tubal ligation and it is unlikely that she will become pregnant in the future. OR the patient has a classical (or low-segment vertical) incision and thus should not labour in the future. Dr. Maria Giroux. Last updated January 2019. OBGYN